>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 20: PRESIDENT
ELECT DONALD TRUMP CONTINUES TO
INTERVIEW CANDIDATES FOR TOP
JOBS IN HIS ADMINISTRATION.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT: AS
THE CAMPAIGN TO DEFEAT I.S.I.S.
IN MOSUL CONTINUES, IRAQI
CHRISTIANS FIGHT FOR THEIR
SURVIVAL.
AND A CONVERSATION WITH THE
U.S. AMBASSADOR IN IRAQ.
NEXT ON "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
PRESIDENT-ELECT DONALD TRUMP HAS
SPENT THE WEEKEND AT HIS GOLF
CLUB IN NEW JERSEY MEETING
POTENTIAL CABINET MEMBERS AND
WHITE HOUSE STAFF.
MISTER TRUMP HAS BEEN
ACCOMPANIED BY HIS TRANSITION
TEAM CHIEF, VICE PRESIDENT-ELECT
MIKE PENCE.
THE PAIR TOOK TIME OUT FROM
THEIR MEETINGS TODAY TO ATTEND
SERVICES AT A PRESBYTERIAN
CHURCH.
AMONG TODAY'S INVITEES WERE
FORMER NEW YORK CITY MAYOR RUDY
GIULIANI, NEW JERSEY GOVERNOR
CHRIS CHRISTIE, AND KANSAS
SECRETARY OF STATE KRIS KOBACH.
MISTER PENCE SAID TODAY MITT
ROMNEY, WHO MET WITH TRUMP
YESTERDAY IS A "SERIOUS
CONTENDER" FOR SECRETARY OF
STATE.
MR. TRUMP DESCRIBED RETIRED
MARINE GENERAL RICHARD MATTIS
WHO WAS INTERVIEWED FOR
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE AS "VERY
IMPRESSIVE."
ON CBS' "FACE THE NATION" TODAY,
PENCE SAID THE ADMINISTRATION
WILL TAKE STEPS TO AVOID
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST WITH THE
TRUMP ORGANIZATION'S
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS HOLDINGS,
>> I'M VERY CONFIDENT THAT THE
PRESIDENT-ELECT AND HIS
EXTRAORDINARY TALENTED FAMILY
ARE GOING TO WORK WITH THE BEST
LEGAL MINDS IN THIS COUNTRY AND
CREATE THE PROPER SEPARATION
FROM THEIR BUSINESS ENTERPRISE
DURING HIS DUTIES AS PRESIDENT
OF THE UNITED STATES.
>> Stewart: ON CNN TODAY,
INCOMING WHITE HOUSE CHIEF OF
STAFF REINCE PRIEBUS REITERATED
MR. TRUMP'S POSITION THAT PEOPLE
FROM COUNTRIES SUSPECTED OF
HARBORING OR TRAINING TERRORISTS
COULD BE TEMPORARILY BARRED FROM
IMMIGRATING TO THE U.S.
ON NBC'S "MEET THE PRESS"
MODERATOR CHUCK TODD ASKED
PRIEBUS ABOUT A POTENTIAL MUSLIM
REGISTRY.
>> WE ARE NOT GOING TO HAVE A
REGISTRY BASED ON A RELIGION,
BUT I THINK WHAT WE ARE TRYING
TO DO, IS SAY THAT THERE ARE
SOME PEOPLE, CERTAINLY NOT ALL
PEOPLE, CHUCK, THERE ARE SOME
PEOPLE THAT ARE RADICALIZED AND
THERE ARE SOME PEOPLE THAT HAVE
TO BE PREVENTED FROM COMING INTO
THIS COUNTRY.
>> Stewart: PRESIDENT OBAMA IS
FLYING HOME TONIGHT AFTER
WINDING UP HIS FINAL OFFICIAL
FOREIGN TRIP AS PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES.
MR. OBAMA ATTENDED THE ASIA-
PACIFIC ECONOMIC COOPERATION
SUMMIT IN LIMA, PERU AND TODAY
ALONG WITH OTHER LEADERS DONNED
A TRADITIONAL SHAWL WORN BY
SHEEP HERDERS IN THE ANDES.
OBAMA MET SEPARATELY WITH SOME
OF THE 11 U.S. PARTNERS IN THE
PROPOSED TRANS-PACIFIC TRADE
PACT THAT WOULD COVER 40% OF
GLOBAL TRADE.
BUT PRESIDENT-ELECT DONALD TRUMP
AND THE REPUBLICAN-LED SENATE
WILL ALMOST CERTAINLY REJECT THE
DEAL."
NEW YORK TIMES" CORRESPONDENT
GARDINER HARRIS COVERED THE
TRIP, WHICH BEGAN IN GREECE AND
GERMANY.
>> HE BASICALLY HAS SPENT THIS
WHOLE WEEK DURING HIS LAST TRIP
ABROAD AS PRESIDENT TRYING TO
REASSURE HIS AUDIENCES.
OBVIOUSLY, THE TRUMP PRESIDENCY
HAS CAUSED AN ENORMOUS AMOUNT OF
ANXIETY AMONG TRADITIONAL
ALLIES.
>> Stewart: EARLIER, MISTER
OBAMA MET FOR JUST FOUR MINUTES
WITH RUSSIAN PRESIDENT VLADIMIR
PUTIN.
THE WHITE HOUSE SAYING THE TWO
LEADERS BRIEFLY DISCUSSED SYRIA
AND UKRAINE.
IN GERMANY, CHANCELLOR ANGELA
MERKEL ANNOUNCED TODAY SHE'LL
RUN FOR A FOURTH TERM IN
ELECTIONS NEXT YEAR.
FIRST SHE MUST WIN THE CONTEST
TO BE THE LEADER OF HER PARTY,
THE CHRISTIAN DEMOCRAT PARTY,
NEXT MONTH.
MERKEL BECAME GERMANY'S FIRST
FEMALE HEAD OF GOVERNMENT WHEN
SHE WAS ELECTED CHANCELLOR IN
2005.
THERE WAS SOME SPECULATION SHE
MIGHT NOT RUN AGAIN DUE TO HER
PARTY'S POOR SHOWING IN REGIONAL
ELECTIONS FOLLOWING A BACKLASH
OVER HER OPEN DOOR POLICY ON
REFUGEES.
BUT IN A NEW POLL OUT TODAY,
ALMOST 60% OF GERMANS SAY THEY
SEE MERKEL AS A FIGURE OF
STABILITY AND TRUST IN UNCERTAIN
TIMES IN EUROPE AND THE UNITED
STATES.
IMMIGRATION AND ISLAMIC
EXTREMISM WERE TOP ISSUES IN
FRANCE'S CONSERVATIVE PARTY
PRESIDENTIAL PRIMARY TODAY.
FORMER PRESIDENT NICOLAS SARKOZY
WAS AMONG THE CANDIDATES, BUT
WITH MUCH OF THE VOTE COUNTED,
HE APPEARED TO PLACE THIRD AND
OUT THE RUNNING IN NEXT SUNDAY'S
RUN-OFF.
INCUMBENT FRANCOIS HOLLANDE HAS
NOT SAID IF HE'LL SEEK A SECOND
FIVE-YEAR TERM AS THE SOCIALIST
PARTY CANDIDATE IN NEXT SPRING'S
ELECTION.
FAR-RIGHT NATIONAL FRONT LEADER
MARINE LE PEN ALSO PLANS TO
ENTER THE RACE.
SYRIA'S GOVERNMENT TODAY FLATLY
REJECTED A UNITED NATIONS
PROPOSAL TO RESTORE PEACE TO THE
DIVIDED CITY OF ALEPPO.
THE U.N. HAD SUGGESTED THE
SYRIAN GOVERNMENT GRANT AUTONOMY
TO THE REBEL-HELD EASTERN HALF
OF THE CITY WHERE THE U.N.
ESTIMATES ABOUT 275-THOUSAND
CIVILIANS ARE TRAPPED BY THE
FIGHTING.
SYRIAN FOREIGN MINISTER WALID
AL-MOALLEM TURNED DOWN THE
PROPOSAL SAYING IT VIOLATED
SYRIA'S SOVEREIGNTY AND THAT THE
REBELS MUST BE EXPELLED.
THE SYRIAN AMERICAN MEDICAL
SOCIETY, A NON PROFIT
HUMANITARIAN ORGANIZATION, SAYS
GOVERNMENT AIR STRIKES HAVE
DAMAGED OR DESTROYED EVERY
HOSPITAL IN EASTERN ALEPPO.
THE SYRIAN OBSERVATORY FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS SAYS AT LEAST 240 PEOPLE
HAVE BEEN KILLED IN ALEPPO IN
THE PAST WEEK.
JUST HOW LOW WAS VOTER TURNOUT
IN THIS YEAR'S ELECTION?
FIND OUT AT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Stewart: IRAQI MILITARY
COMMANDERS SAID TODAY THEY'RE
TRYING TO RETAKE THE COUNTRY'S
SECOND LARGEST CITY, MOSUL,
NEIGHBORHOOD BY NEIGHBORHOOD;
AND DELIVER FOOD TO CIVILIANS
TRAPPED UNDER ISIS CONTROL SINCE
2014.
IRAQ IS A PREDOMINANTLY MUSLIM
COUNTRY, BUT THERE IS A SMALL
CHRISTIAN COMMUNITY THAT HAS
BEEN THERE FOR CENTURIES.
THIS WEEKEND, IN THE LIBERATED
NORTHERN IRAQI TOWN OF BASHIQA,
TEN MILES OUTSIDE MOSUL... BELLS
TOLLED, AND A NEW CROSS WAS
ERECTED AT A CHURCH THAT
REOPENED TODAY FOR THE FIRST
TIME IN TWO YEARS.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
"NEWSHOUR WEEKEND" SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT CHRISTOPHER
LIVESAY BRINGS US THE SECOND
PART OF HIS REPORTS FROM INSIDE
IRAQ: A LOOK AT HOW IRAQI
CHRISTIANS ARE COPING IN THE
WAR-TORN COUNTRY.
>> Reporter: IRAQ'S NINEVEH
PLAINS LIE BETWEEN THE KURDISH
NORTH AND THE ARAB SOUTH.
THE AREA IS HOME TO A VARIETY OF
ETHNIC MINORITIES, INCLUDING A
GROUP OF PEOPLE KNOWN AS
ASSYRIANS.
THEY ARE DESCENDANTS OF THE
WORLD'S FIRST CHRISTIANS, WHOSE
PRESENCE HERE DATES BACK TO THE
FIRST CENTURY A.D.
THEY SPEAK A DIALECT OF ARAMAIC
SIMILAR TO THE LANGUAGE SPOKEN
BY JESUS.
ANWAR ESHO IS A BOOK PRINTER.
COULD YOU READ SOMETHING FOR US?
>> YEAH, OF COURSE.
>> Reporter: IT'S SPEAKING ABOUT
THE MOTHER OF JESUS?
ABOUT MARY?
TODAY, THERE ARE FEWER THAN 250-
THOUSAND CHRISTIANS LIVING IN
IRAQ, DOWN FROM MORE THAN A
MILLION AT THE START OF THE US-
LED WAR IN 2003.
THE LATEST THREAT TO THEM HAS
COME FROM ISIS.
THE MILITANTS INVADED THE
NINEVEH PLAINS TWO YEARS AGO,
OCCUPIED MOSUL, AND MANY OF THE
SURROUNDING TOWNS.
THEY DESTROYED ANCIENT, PRE-
ISLAMIC ART, RAZED ASSYRIAN
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES TO THE
GROUND, AND ISSUED CHRISTIANS A
CHILLING ULTIMATUM: CONVERT TO
ISLAM, PAY TAXES TO US, OR DIE.
THOUSANDS OF IRAQI CHRISTIANS
FLED MOSUL, INCLUDING MAYADA ABD
GHANY, HER HUSBAND, AND THEIR
FOUR CHILDREN.
ISIS GAVE THEM ONLY THREE DAYS
NOTICE TO LEAVE THEIR HOME,
ENOUGH TIME TO PACK SOME CLOTHES
AND FAMILY PICTURES.
THEY LIVE NOW IN AN OLD SCHOOL
BUILDING CONVERTED INTO REFUGEE
HOUSING IN THE NEARBY CHRISTIAN
TOWN OF ALQOSH, WHICH ISIS HAD
IN ITS SIGHTS BEFORE IRAQI AND
KURDISH FORCES PUSHED THEM BACK.
NOW SHE LISTENS TO THE RADIO FOR
NEWS ABOUT HOME, WHERE ISIS
KIDNAPPED HER BROTHER TWO YEARS
AGO.
SHE HASN'T HEARD FROM HIM SINCE.
THIS IS A RADIO STATION THAT
TAKES PHONE CALLS FROM ANTI-ISIS
PEOPLE INSIDE OF MOSUL.
THEY PHONE IN AND LET PEOPLE ON
THE OUTSIDE KNOW EXACTLY WHAT'S
GOING ON IN THE CITY, AND IT'S
REALLY DANGEROUS.
IF ISIS CATCHES THEM THEY COULD
HANG THEM.
APPARENTLY THEY JUST HANGED FOUR
PEOPLE FOR DOING THINGS LIKE
THAT.
BEFORE THEY SET OUT TO RETAKE
MOSUL LAST MONTH, THE IRAQI ARMY
AND THE KURDISH FIGHTERS KNOWN
AS THE PESHMERGA, BOTH WITH
SUPPORT FROM THE U.S. MILITARY,
BEGAN LIBERATING SMALL TOWNS ON
THE WAY, INCLUDING SEVERAL
MAJORITY CHRISTIAN TOWNS LIKE
BATNAYA THAT HAD BEEN OCCUPIED
BY ISIS.
AND WHEN DID THEY LEAVE?
>> THREE DAYS AGO.
>> Reporter: THREE DAYS AGO?
THIS IS FRESH.
WE WALKED THROUGH BATNAYA WITH
FATHER EMANUEL YOUKHANA.
WE'VE GOT TO WATCH OUR STEP,
BECAUSE THERE COULD BE IEDs
AROUND HERE.
YOUKHANA IS A LEADER IN THE
ASSYRIAN CHURCH.
HE RUNS A LOCAL CHRISTIAN
CHARITY.
HE WAS ANXIOUS TO INSPECT THE
TOWN'S HISTORIC CHURCH TO SEE
WHAT DAMAGE ISIS HAD DONE.
THIS WAS HIS FIRST TIME BACK IN
TWO YEARS.
IS THERE ONE WORD TO DESCRIBE
HOW YOU FELT WHEN YOU STEPPED
THROUGH THAT DOOR?
>> JOY THAT THE CHURCH HAD
SURVIVED.
BUT SADNESS FOR WHAT HAS BEEN
DONE IN THE CHURCH.
>> Reporter: HOLY BOOKS WERE
BURNED.
THE BOOK OF PSALMS?
>> YES.
>> Reporter: ISIS, OR DAESH, AS
IT'S KNOWN HERE, LEFT ITS MARK.
THIS SYMBOL OVER HERE.
I'VE SEEN THIS BEFORE.
>> THIS IS BY DAESH.
ALLAH, ISLAMIC SLOGANS.
>> Reporter: DURING OUR VISIT,
AN IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICE
ISIS LEFT BEHIND AS A BOOBY TRAP
DETONATED OUTSIDE THE CHURCH.
>> WE ARE IN DANGER.
>> Reporter: OKAY, OKAY
WE WERE JUST TOLD WE HAVE TO GET
OUT OF HERE, BECAUSE THERE ARE A
LOT OF EXPLOSIONS HAPPENING, SO
IT'S TIME TO GO.
>> WE HAVE TO GO.
>> Reporter: EVEN IF THESE TOWNS
BECOME SAFER, THAT DOESN'T MEAN
THE CHRISTIANS WHO WERE FORCED
OUT WILL BE WILLING OR ABLE TO
COME BACK, ACCORDING TO FATHER
EMANUEL.
>> ONE OF OUR IMMEDIATE CONCERNS
IS WHAT WILL HAPPEN IN THESE
CHRISTIAN TOWNS WHEN THEY ARE
LIBERATED?
BECAUSE WE HAVE CONCERNS THAT
THEY'LL BE OCCUPIED.
>> Reporter: OCCUPIED BY NON-
CHRISTIANS.
FATHER EMANUEL SAYS THERE ARE
SIGNS THAT IRAQI MUSLIM TROOPS,
IN PARTICULAR SHIITES, ARE
SHOWING THEIR COLORS IN SOME
CHRISTIAN TOWNS IN AN ATTEMPT TO
INTIMIDATE CHRISTIANS.
HE'S COUNTING ON CHRISTIAN
MILITIAS TO PROTECT CHRISTIAN
PROPERTY.
DOGLAS AZIZ IS A SOLDIER IN A
CHRISTIAN MILITIA CALLED DWEKH
NAWSHA, MEANING "THOSE WHO
SACRIFICE."
AN AIR-CONDITIONING REPAIRMAN
AND FATHER OF THREE LITTLE
GIRLS, AZIZ HELPED LIBERATE
BATNAYA.
>> IT WAS A FIERCE BATTLE.
>> Reporter: AZIZ SAYS ISIS HAD
SNIPERS AND GRENADES AND SUICIDE
BOMBERS ON MOTORCYCLES.
HE SHOT THIS VIDEO WHILE ON
PATROL... SHOWING HOW ISIS DUG
TUNNELS UNDER THE CHURCH TO
PROTECT THEMSELVES FROM
AMERICAN-LED AIR STRIKES.
IN THE END, THE MILITIAMEN
HELPED DRIVE ISIS OUT.
IT WAS A PROUD MOMENT WHEN AZIZ
HIMSELF CLIMBED TO THE TOP OF
THE CHURCH IN BATNAYA TO REPLACE
THE CROSS.
>> WE'RE VERY HAPPY WE ARE
WINNING.
WE WANT ASSYRIANS TO CONTROL
THIS AREA.
>> Reporter: STILL, SOME IN THE
ASSYRIAN CHRISTIAN COMMUNITY,
LIKE PRINTER ANWAR ESHO ARE
PESSIMISTIC ABOUT THE FUTURE.
HE DOESN'T TRUST THE KURDS OR
THE IRAQI GOVERNMENT TO PROTECT
THEM.
WHAT'S THE FUTURE LOOK LIKE FOR
CHRISTIANS IN THIS AREA?
>> IT SEEMS VERY DARK, YEAH,
REALLY.
IF THEY DON'T HAVE ANY POWER,
AND THEY DON'T HAVE ANYONE TO
SUPPORT THEM, THEY CAN DO
NOTHING.
THE ONLY THING THEY CAN DO, THEY
WILL LEAVE.
SO THEY ARE GOING TO EUROPE OR
TO AMERICA OR TO AUSTRALIA OR TO
OTHER PLACES, SO THEY ARE
VANISHING.
>> Reporter: MAYADA ABD GHANY,
WHOSE FAMILY HAS FOUND REFUGE IN
THE CHRISTIAN TOWN OF ALQOSH,
DOESN'T KNOW WHAT SHE WILL DO
WHEN THE FIGHTING STOPS IN
MOSUL.
ALTHOUGH SHE WAS COMFORTABLE
LIVING AMONG MUSLIMS BEFORE, SHE
SAYS SOME COLLABORATED WITH
ISIS, AND NOW SHE'S FEARFUL OF
HAVING MUSLIM NEIGHBORS AGAIN.
>> THAT'S IN THE PAST.
I DON'T TRUST THEM ANYMORE.
>> Reporter: SHE AND THE REST OF
IRAQ'S CHRISTIANS WILL HAVE TO
PICK UP THE PIECES AS ISIS
RETREATS.
JUST LAST WEEK, ISIS SURRENDERED
THE ANCIENT ASSYRIAN CITY OF
NIMRUD, BUT NOT BEFORE LAYING
WASTE TO ITS VAST CULTURAL
HERITAGE DATING OVER 1,000 YEARS
BEFORE JESUS.
FATHER EMANUEL SAYS ULTIMATELY
THE FUTURE OF CHRISTIANITY IN
IRAQ WILL BE DETERMINED BY THOSE
WHO DECIDE TO COME HOME TO THE
CHRISTIAN GHOST TOWNS OF THE
NINEVEH PLAINS.
HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF
CHRISTIANS HAVE LEFT IRAQ.
IF THIS TREND CONTINUES, AREN'T
YOU WORRIED THERE MAY BE NO
CHRISTIANS HERE?
>> IT'S A CHALLENGING QUESTION
TO KEEP THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH
ALIVE HERE.
AND WE CAN.
WE CAN.
WE WILL NEVER, NEVER GIVE UP.
WE MIGHT BE HELPLESS, BUT WE ARE
NEVER HOPELESS.
>> Stewart: THE U.S. AMBASSADOR
TO IRAQ IS DOUGLAS SILLIMAN, A
CAREER FOREIGN SERVICE OFFICER
WHO HAS WORKED ON AND OFF IN
IRAQ SINCE 2011, HAS PREVIOUSLY
SERVED AS U.S. AMBASSADOR TO
KUWAIT, AND HAS HELD OTHER POSTS
IN TURKEY AND JORDAN.
AMBASSADOR SILLIMAN JOINS ME NOW
FROM BAGHDAD TO DISCUSS THE
ONGOING U.S. PRESENCE AND ROLE
IN IRAQ AND THE FIGHT AGAINST
ISIS, SOMETIMES REFERRED TO AS
ISIL AND DAESH.
>> AMBASSADOR, AS SOMEONE
WITHOUT HAS WORKED IN AND AROUND
THAT REGION OVER A PROLONGED
PERIOD OF TIME, I WOULD LIKE TO
GET YOUR PERSPECTIVE.
IS IRAQ MORE OR LESS STABLE THAN
IT WAS IN 2011?
>> ALISON, THANK YOU VERY MUCH
FOR HAVING ME TODAY.
ON MY RETURN THREE MONTHS AGO, I
WAS VERY PLEASED TO SEE THE
FEELING OF STABILITY IN IRAQ
COMPARED TO WHAT I FELT IN
PREVIOUS TOURS HERE.
ESPECIALLY I HAD SEEN A
DEVELOPMENT IN THE
PROFESSIONALISM OF THE IRAQI
MILITARY AND SECURITY FORCES
THAT I THINK HAS CONTRIBUTED TO
THIS, THAT PROBABLY THE MOST
IMPORTANT IS A VERY STRONG
SPIRIT AMONG ALL IRAQIS IN THE
FIGHT AGAINST DAESH.
>> UPON TAKING THE POST YOU SAID
THE UNITED STATES IS AND WOULD
BE WORKING WITH PRIME MINISTER
ABADI TO HELP, AND THIS IS A
QUOTE, MEET THE NEEDS FOR THE
LIBERATION OF THE CITY OF MOSUL.
WHAT ARE THOSE NEEDS, AND HOW
INVOLVED IS MR. ABADI.
>> WELL, PRIME MINISTER ABADI
HAS BEEN VERY MUCH INVOLVED IN
THE PLANNING FOR THE MILITARY
ASSAULT ON MOSUL.
HE HAS ALSO BEEN VERY INVOLVED
IN THE PLANNING FOR THE
HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE FOR
THOSE PEOPLE WHO HAVE BEEN
PUSHED OUT OF MOSUL BECAUSE OF
THE FIGHTING, AND ALSO TAKING
CARE OF THE NEEDS OF THOSE WHO
ARE LEFT INSIDE THE CITY.
SO THE UNITED STATES HAS ALSO
PLAYED A SIGNIFICANT ROLE IN
BOTH HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE TO
THE INTERNALLY DISPLACED, BUT WE
HAVE ALSO WORKED VERY CLOSELY AS
THE LEADER OF THE INTERNATIONAL
COALITION AGAINST DAESH TO
PROVIDE ADVICE AND ASSISTANCE TO
THE IRAQI MILITARY, AIR STRIKES
IN COORDINATION WITH THE IRAQI
MILITARY AND A SIGNIFICANT
AMOUNT OF TRAINING FOR IRAQI
SECURITY FORCES.
>> SHOULD ISIS BE EXPUNGED FROM
MOSUL WHAT IS BEING DONE TO
SCAFFOLD THE IRAQI GOVERNMENT
AND INSTITUTION SO IT CAN HOLD
AND MAINTAIN ISIL WANTS THAT IS
A GOOD QUESTION, THERE IS A LOT
THAT IS BEING DONE, FIRST OF
ALL, IN COORDINATION WITH THE
UNITED NATIONS AND SPECIFICALLY
WITH THE U.N. DEVELOPMENT
PROGRAM, THE UNITED STATES AND
OTHER INTERNATIONAL PARTNERS
HAVE BEEN WORKING WITH THE
GOVERNMENT OF IRAQ TO DO A WE
ARE CALLING STABILIZATION.
MAKING SURE THAT PEOPLE GO INTO
THE GROUND AFTER AREAS ARE
LIBERATED FROM DAESH,
RECONNECTING THE ELECTRICITY,
MAKING SURE THAT THE WATERWORKS,
CLEANING UP THE DEBRIS OF WAR
WHERE IT EXISTS AND GETTING THE
BASIC INFRASTRUCTURE OF LIFE
GOING AGAIN.
NEIGHBORHOOD HEALTH CLINICS,
SCHOOLS FOR CHILDREN, AND SMALL
LOANS FOR BUSINESS PEOPLE WHO
WANT TO GET THEIR SHOPS OPEN
AGAIN.
THIS IS IN IRAQ A RELATIVELY
TESTED MODEL.
WE HAVE USED THIS AS THE IRAQI
MILITARY HAS LIBERATED THE
CITIES OF RAMADI, FALLUJAH, AND
PARTICULARLY IN THE PAST.
AND THE UNITED NATIONS, UNITED
STATES AND ESPECIALLY THE IRAQI
GOVERNMENT HAVE IMPROVED EACH
TIME THAT THEY LIBERATE A CITY
AND WORK ON REPAIRING THE
SERVICES.
>> MOSUL IS A CHALLENGE BECAUSE
IT'S THE LARGEST CITY THAT WILL
HAVE TO BE LIBERATED AND
REHABILITATED.
BUT WE HAVE A LOT OF EXPERIENCE
AND THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
HAS PUT TOGETHER A VERY GOOD
TEAM.
AND HAS BEEN VERY GENEROUS,
INCLUDING THE UNITED STATES IN
THESE EFFORTS.
>> SO THE REHABILITATION OF
THESE OTHER CITIES YOU MENTIONED
ARE A MODEL TO WHAT YOU HOPE
WILL HAPPEN IN MOSUL?
>> THE REHABILITATION FOR THE
OTHER CITIES HAS REALLY BEEN A
LABORATORY FOR THE WAY TO DO
THIS IN THE BEST WAY POSSIBLE.
EACH CITY HAS HAD A DIFFERENT
EXPERIENCE WITH DAESH AND WITH
WAR, SO THE STABILIZATION
REHABILITATION OF EACH CITY HAS
BEEN SLIGHTLY DIFFERENT.
FOR EXAMPLE, IN THE CITY OF
TIKRIT, MORE THAN 95% OF THE
CIVILIAN POPULATION HAS RETURNED
TO THEIR HOMES.
SCHOOLS ARE OPEN, UNIVERSITY HAS
REOPENED.
AND SHOPS AND TRAFFIC SEEM VERY
CLOSE TO NORMAL.
IN CITIES LIKE RAMADI WHERE
THERE WAS MORE DESTRUCTION, A
SIGNIFICANT PART OF THE
POPULATION HAS RETURNED BUT
THERE ARE STILL AREAS OF THE
CITY THAT LITERALLY HAVE TO BE
REBUILT AND THAT WILL TAKE SOME
TIME FOR BOTH THE GOVERNMENT AND
THE INDIVIDUAL HOMEOWNERS WHO
HAVE TO GO BACK AND RECOVER
THEIR LIVES AFTER THE WAR.
>> THE KURDISH FIGHTERS, THE
PESHMERGA HAVE BEEN CRUCIAL FOR
THIS FIGHT, BUT SOME OF THE
LEADERS EXPRESSED THEIR
ASPIRATION FOR INDEPENDENCE,
THAT IS OBVIOUSLY COMPLEX GIVEN
ALL THE PLAYERS.
WHAT IS THE U.S. POSITION ON
KURDISH INDEPENDENCE.
>> WHAT I HAVE BEEN MOST
SURPRISED AND PLEASED BY, IN THE
MILITARY OPERATIONS IN MOSUL HAS
BEEN THE VERY HIGH DEGREE OF
COOPERATION AND COORDINATION
BETWEEN THE IRAQI ARMY AND THE
KURDISH PESHMERGA FIGHTERS.
I THINK THERE IS RETICENCE ON
BOTH SIDES TO COOPERATE AT THE
BEGINNING BUT WITH A LITTLE BIT
OF AMERICAN ASSISTANCE, THEY
HAVE PUT TOGETHER A VERY GOOD
JOINT BATTLE PLAN FOR MOSUL AND
EACH SIDE HAS BEEN WORKING VERY
HONESTLY AND OPENLY IN
COORDINATING WITH THE OTHER ON
THE ACTUAL OPERATIONS
THEMSELVES.
NOW AS FOR, IN THE POLITICAL
LEADERSHIP, THIS COOPERATION HAS
ALSO SPARKED GOOD WILL AND
COOPERATION BETWEEN IRAQI PRIME
MINISTER ABADI AND IRAQI KURD
STAND REGION PRESIDENT BARZANI.
THEY HAVE HAD MORE CONVERSATIONS
THAN USUAL AND BARZANI HAS COME
TO VISIT ABADI IN BAG
DAN-- BAGHDAD, SOMETHING HE
HASN'T DONE MUCH IN THE PAST.
AND PRESIDENT ABADI HAS VISITED
PRESIDENT BARZANI AS WELL.
SO I'M CONFIDENT THE
COORDINATION AND POLITICAL LEVEL
GOOD WIL AND COOPERATION WILL
PROVIDE US WITH A GOOD PATHWAY
FORWARD FOLLOWING THE MOSUL
CAMPAIGN.
>> NOW SIR, YOU WORK IN THE
GREEN ZONE WHICH IS NORMALLY A
SECURE AND SAFE AREA.
BUT IT WAS PREPARED EARLIER THIS
YEAR.
I KNOW LATE LAST MONTH THERE WAS
A SECURITY WARNING ISSUED FOR
AMERICANS SPECIFICALLY
MENTIONING POTENTIAL KIDNAPPINGS
OF PEOPLE WORKING FOR NGO'S.
WHAT ARE YOUR SAFETY CONCERNS
FOR AMERICANS IN IRAQ CURRENTLY?
>> ALISON, IT IS STILL A
MODERATELY DANGEROUS PLACE IN
IRAQ.
THERE ARE PARTS OF THE COUNTRY
THAT ARE PRETTY SAFE.
BUT THERE ARE STILL MANY MEMBERS
OF DAESH WHO ARE ABLE TO ESCAPE
THE AREAS WHERE THEY HAVE BEEN
ISOLATED BY THE IRAQI MILITARY
AND CONDUCT SOME ATTACKS.
IF YOU LOOK AT THE PROGRESS THAT
THE IRAQI ARMY AND THE IRAQI
POLICE HAVE MADE OVER THE PAST
SIX MONTHS, YOU WILL SEE
PARTICULARLY FOR THE LARGE
CITIES LIKE BAGHDAD, THE NUMBER
OF ATTACKS, ARMED ATTACKED OR
BOMBING ATTACKS HAS DROPPED
SIGNIFICANTLY AS SECURITY HAS
TIGHTENED.
AND FRANKLY AS THE INTELLIGENCE
AND COOPERATION THAT WORKS WITH
THE INTERNATIONAL COALITION AND
BETWEEN IRAQI POLICE AND
SECURITY AGENCIES HAVE IMPROVED.
SO IT IS STILL A DANGEROUS
PLACE.
AND WE STILL CAUTION AMERICANS
TO BE VERY SURE OF YOUR SECURITY
ARRANGEMENTS BEFORE YOU COME TO
IRAQ.
BUT WE SEE IN GENERAL THAT THE
SECURITY SITUATION IS IMPROVING.
AND WE HOPE THAT ONCE DAESH IS
PUSHED OUT OF IRAQ, THE SECURITY
ENVIRONMENT WILL IMPROVE EVEN
MORE.
>> MR. AMBASSADOR, WHAT DO YOU
BELIEVE IS THE BIGGEST CHALLENGE
FOR THE INCOMING ADMINISTRATION,
THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION?
>> I THINK THAT THE BIGGEST
CHALLENGE FOR THE ADMINISTRATION
IS TRYING TO DECIDE HOW MUCH,
WHAT THE NEXT STEP WILL BE IN
THE AMERICAN RELATIONSHIP WITH
IRAQ.
I KNOW THAT PRIME MINISTER ABADI
THIS WEEK CALLED PRESIDENT-ELECT
TRUMP AND HE SAYS THAT HE HAD A
VERY GOOD CONVERSATION WITH
PRESIDENT-ELECT TRUMP.
SO I'M OPTIMISTIC THAT THIS
RELATIONSHIP WILL CONTINUE TO BE
A SOLID ONE UNDER THE NEW
ADMINISTRATION.
>> AMBASSADOR SILLIMAN, THANK
YOU SO MUCH FOR YOUR TIME TODAY.
>> ALISON, THANK YOU.
>> Stewart: IN INDIA, RESCUERS
ARE SEARCHING FOR SURVIVORS IN
THE WRECKAGE OF THE NATION'S
DEADLIEST TRAIN CRASH IN SIX
YEARS.
OFFICIALS SAY THIS MORNING AS
PASSENGERS SLEPT, 14 CARS OF AN
EXPRESS TRAIN DERAILED NEAR THE
INDUSTRIAL CITY OF KANPUR, ABOUT
250 MILES SOUTH OF DELHI.
AT LEAST 115 PEOPLE WERE KILLED
AND MORE THAN 150 PEOPLE WERE
INJURED.
INDIA HAS ONE OF THE WORLD'S
MOST EXTENSIVE AND ACCIDENT-
PRONE RAIL SYSTEMS.
THE POLITICAL CRISIS IN SOUTH
KOREA DEEPENED TODAY WHEN
PROSECUTORS FORMALLY INDICTED A
CLOSE FRIEND OF PRESIDENT PARK
GEUN-HYE IN A CORRUPTION
SCANDAL, AND SAID PARK HERSELF
CONSPIRED IN THE SCHEME.
PROSECUTORS INDICTED PARK
CONFIDANTE CHOI SOON-SIL WITH
SUSPICION OF INTERFERING WITH
STATE AFFAIRS AND FOR USING HER
FRIENDSHIP WITH THE PRESIDENT TO
PRESSURE COMPANIES INTO
CONTRIBUTING MILLIONS TO
FOUNDATIONS SHE CONTROLS.
TWO AIDES TO PRESIDENT PARK WERE
ALSO CHARGED.
PROSECUTORS SAID THEY DID NOT
INDICT PRESIDENT PARK, BECAUSE
AS PRESIDENT SHE HAS
CONSTITUTIONAL IMMUNITY FROM
CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.
TODAY'S DEVELOPMENTS ARE
EXPECTED TO INCREASE THE
PRESSURE ON HER TO RESIGN OR FOR
PARLIAMENT TO IMPEACH HER.
A PARK SPOKESMAN CALLED THE
ACCUSATIONS UNTRUE AND "BUILT ON
IMAGINATION AND SPECULATION THAT
COMPLETELY IGNORES OBJECTIVE
EVIDENCE."
HAITI FINALLY HELD ITS DELAYED
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION TODAY.
HAITI'S SIX MILLION VOTERS HAD
27 CANDIDATES FROM WHICH TO
CHOSE.
LAST YEAR'S ELECTION RESULTS
WERE ANNULLED BECAUSE OF FRAUD
AND LAST MONTH'S SCHEDULED DO-
OVER WAS PUT OFF, BECAUSE OF
DEVASTATING HURRICANE MATTHEW.
TODAY TURNOUT WAS LOW.
MANY HAITIANS ARE STILL
STRUGGLING TO RECOVER FROM THE
DEADLY STORM WHICH KILLED UP TO
A THOUSAND PEOPLE AND LEFT
THOUSANDS MORE HOMELESS.
THE TOP TWO VOTE GETTERS WILL
COMPETE IN A JANUARY RUNOFF.
>> Stewart: FINALLY, AT HIS LAST
MAJOR INTERNATIONAL SUMMIT,
PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS UPPED THE
ANTE ON FREE TRADE.
THE FINAL COMMUNIQUE FROM THE
ASIA PACIFIC ECONOMIC
COOPERATION SUMMIT IN LIMA,
PERU, VOWS TO RESIST
PROTECTIONISM AND PURSUES A NEW
21-NATION FREE TRADE DEAL THAT'S
EVEN BROADER THAN THE PENDING
12-NATION TRANS-PACIFIC
PARTNERSHIP THAT FACES REJECTION
FROM PRESIDENT-ELECT DONALD
TRUMP AND A REPUBLICAN-LED
SENATE.
MR. OBAMA ALSO SAID NOT MOVING
FORWARD WITH THE T.P.P. COULD
UNDERMINE THE U.S. POSITION IN
THE REGION.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M ALISON STEWART, GOOD NIGHT.